---
title: "Affect, Not Ideology: A Social Identity Perspective on Polarization"
author: Shanto Iyengar, Gaurav Sood and Yphtach Lelkes
date: 2012-08-01 00:00:00
publication_date: Aug 01, 2012
categories: ["2012"]
tags: [['Affective-polarization', 'US', 'Quantitative', 'Descriptive', 'ANES', 'International']]
curator: Erik Peterson
journal: Public Opinion Quarterly
journal_link: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41684577
author_link: https://pcl.sites.stanford.edu/sites/g/files/sbiybj22066/files/media/file/iyengar-poq-affect-not-ideology.pdf
pre_reg: ⚠️
open_data: ❌
---

## Article Summary

### Introduction

Politics can evoke strong feelings. After a political campaign, supporters of the winning candidate celebrate, while those on the losing side despair. At family events and social gatherings some avoid discussing politics because it can lead to intense disagreements. Despite the emotional resonance that politics holds, many of the theories and measurements social scientists use to evaluate political polarization do not address this and instead focus on policy-based disagreements among the American public. In “Affect, Not <span class="glosstag" data-key="Ideology">Ideology</span>: A Social Identity Perspective on Polarization” Shanto Iyengar, Gaurav Sood and Yphtach Lelkes remedy this disconnect by studying <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span>—the divide in how people feel about the political party they identity with compared to the other party. 

The article’s theoretical argument is that partisanship is a psychological group attachment, also known as a social identity. People categorize and evaluate others based on whether they are members of the same party. Seen this way, <span class="glosstag" data-key="Partisan">partisan</span> polarization is the difference between the positive feelings that partisans have towards their political party and their negative evaluations of the other side. 

### Analytical Approach

The paper measures <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> using several surveys conducted between 1960 and 2010, including the American National Election Study which conducted face-to-face interviews with nationally representative samples of survey respondents during this time. The authors consider feeling thermometer questions that measure how favorably people evaluate the Democratic and Republican parties. They also examine questions that ask people how comfortable they would be with their child marrying a member of a different party. Finally, they analyze trait rating questions where people report whether supporters of different parties are intelligent or selfish.

### Main Findings

These measures reveal substantial <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> among the American public. In recent years there is a wide gap in how people feel about the political parties. They evaluate their own side much more favorably than the other party. Over 20 percent of people express unease with their child marrying an out-party member. Partisans also assess members of the other party as being much more likely to hold negative traits, and much less likely to hold positive traits, than their co-partisans.

Two comparisons establish that these high levels of <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> are distinctive. An overtime comparison using the feeling thermometers shows <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> in the United States has substantially increased since the late 1980s. This increase is primarily because people now provide much more negative ratings of the other party. Positive views of their own party have remained largely stable during this time. 

A second set of comparisons shows the <span class="glosstag" data-key="Partisan">partisan</span> divide in contemporary American politics is large compared to several benchmarks. Using the same feeling thermometers, the authors show the <span class="glosstag" data-key="Partisan">partisan</span> divide exceeds other divides based on race or religion. Turning to a cross-national comparison, the inter-party marriage and trait rating questions show <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> has increased more in the United States since the 1960s than it has in the United Kingdom. 

### Implications

Prior to this paper, researchers considered political polarization mainly in terms of ideological polarization, or how different Democrats and Republicans were in the policy positions they supported. This produced mixed evidence about polarization among the public. There are some modest increases in ideological polarization, but substantial overlap remains in the issue positions preferred by members of different political parties.  

“Affect, Not <span class="glosstag" data-key="Ideology">Ideology</span>” is important because it focuses attention on the feelings members of the public have for political parties and their supporters. Relative to studies of ideological polarization, this consideration of <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> offers much stronger evidence that <span class="glosstag" data-key="Partisan">partisan</span> division among the public has dramatically increased and that a broad swath of the public is now polarized. The paper’s discussion of partisanship as a social identity, and <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> as a product of the increased relevance of this identity, also substantially expands the areas of life it can impact. Beyond policy positions, the evidence of this paper suggests politics can spill into dating, hiring decisions and other interactions between members of different political parties. Finally, in methodological terms the measures of <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> used in the paper, particularly the difference in feeling thermometer ratings of the two political parties, have appeared in many subsequent studies. 

## Methods and Analysis

> **Was the study and its analyses pre-registered?**: Study was conducted before 2015
> 
{: .prompt-warning}

> **Did the study rely on proxy variables to measure polarization?**: No
> 
{: .prompt-tip}


> **Were standard p-value thresholds used (p<.05 or 95% Confidence Intervals that don’t overlap zero)?**: Yes
>
> - Largest p-value presented as significant: 0.05
{: .prompt-tip}

> **Were correlational results interpreted with causal language?**: Yes
> 
>
> 
{: .prompt-danger}

## Limitations / Weaknesses

The paper raises some key questions that remain unanswered. First, what has caused <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> to increase so much in the United States? From the perspective of social identity theory, something must have occurred to increase the importance of <span class="glosstag" data-key="Partisan">partisan</span> identify for evaluating other people since the 1960s. The paper offers some suggestive answers to this question. The authors show that exposure to negative political campaigns increases dislike of the other side, making the rise of negative campaigning one contributor to increased <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span>. They also find those with more extreme policy views dislike members of the other party more than others, although the magnitude of the relationship between issue positions on economic policy and <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> is largely the same in 1988 as it is in 2004, suggesting this account cannot explain the increase in <span class="glosstag" data-key="Partisan">partisan</span> animosity during this time. In other words, while there is some evidence for both negative campaigning and ideological polarization as contributors to <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span>, more research is still needed to understand why it has increased over time.   Second, how much does <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> impact politics and social life? Attitudes measures in surveys are important but may not always relate to how people behave. On the political front, it is important to understand whether <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> changes how people make political decisions. Outside of politics, <span class="glosstag" data-key="Affective Polarization">affective polarization</span> may have different implications for behavior depending on how well people can identify members of other side and whether other identities that cut across party lines can help to mitigate negative views of out-party members. 

## Open Data & Analyses

> **Does the article make the replication data publicly available?**: No
> 
{: .prompt-danger}

> **Does the article make the replication analysis scripts publicly available?**: No
> 
{: .prompt-danger}


[Link to replication data.](https://electionstudies.org/data-center/){:target='_blank'}

## Article Citation

Iyengar, S., Sood, G., & Lelkes, Y. (2012). Affect, not ideologya social identity perspective on polarization. Public opinion quarterly, 76(3), 405-431.

### Bibtex

```bibtex
@article{iyengar2012affect,
  title={Affect, not ideologya social identity perspective on polarization},
  author={Iyengar, Shanto and Sood, Gaurav and Lelkes, Yphtach},
  journal={Public opinion quarterly},
  volume={76},
  number={3},
  pages={405--431},
  year={2012},
  publisher={Oxford University Press}
}
```

